DISCRETE STRUCTURES PROJECT

When looking at mathematics, we can come across many startling concepts that are counterintuitive and appear to be false, but with careful thinking can be proven to be mathematically true. Here we are discussing  ‘Infinite Hotel Paradox’ or ‘Hilbert’s Hotel’, It is a thought experiment on the nature of infinite numbers which gives some surprising results.



HILBERT’S PARADOX OF THE GRAND HOTEL :
Hilberts Hilbert used it as an example to show how infinity does not act in the same way as regular numbers do. 

Hilbert's paradox is veridical paradox that means “the proposition / the conclusion is in fact  true  despite it’s unreasonable claims. It leads to a counter-intuitive result that it can be able to prove true. The statements "there is a guest to every room" and "no more guests can be accommodated" are not similar when there are infinitely many rooms. 
NOW WE LOOK INTO THE ABOVE CASES WE MENTIONED :
CASE 1: Finitely many new guests

Normal hotels have a set number of rooms. This number is finite. Once every room has been assigned to a guest, any new guest that wants a room and does not have one yet cannot be served - in other words, the hotel is fully booked.

Now suppose that there is a hotel that has an infinite number of rooms. As a convenience, the rooms have numbers, the first room has the number 1, the second has number 2, and so on. If all the rooms are filled, it might appear that no more guests can be taken in, as in a hotel with a finite number of rooms. 

This is wrong, though. A room can be provided for another guest. This can be done by moving the 

guest in room 1 to room 2, the guest in room 2 to room 3, and so on. In the general case, the guest in room n will be moved to room n+1. After all guests have moved, room 1 is empty, and the new guest now has a room to occupy. 
This shows how we can find a room for a new guest even if the hotel is already full, something that could not happen in any hotel with a finite number of rooms.

In general, assume that k guests seek a room. We can apply the same procedure and move every 
guest from room n to room n + k. In a similar manner, if k guests wished to leave the hotel, every guest moves from room n to room n − k. 
CASE 2: Infinitely many new guests(countably infinite guests)

Another thing that can be done with this imaginary hotel is to double the number of people inside, again when all the rooms are already full. This is done by asking each guest to multiply their room number by two and move to that room. 

(If their previous room number was n, this time they would move to room number 2n.) 
This would send the guest in room 1 to room 2, the guest in room 2 to room 4, the guest in room 3 to room 6, the guest in room 4 to room 8, and so on.

 After finishing, we find that all the rooms with the odd numbers are empty. Then we can put an infinite number of guests into these empty rooms. Now the number of guests in the hotel has been doubled without making the hotel bigger.


Infinitely many coaches with infinitely many guests each[edit]
Further information: Pairing function
It is possible to accommodate countably infinitely many coachloads of countably infinite passengers each, by several different methods. Most methods depend on the seats in the coaches being already numbered (or use the axiom of countable choice). In general any pairing function can be used to solve this problem. For each of these methods, consider a passenger's seat number on a coach to be  , and their coach number to be  , and the numbers   and   are then fed into the two arguments of the pairing function.
Prime powers method[edit]
Send the guest in room   to room  , then put the first coach's load in rooms  , the second coach's load in rooms  ; for coach number   we use the rooms   where   is the  th odd prime number. This solution leaves certain rooms empty (which may or may not be useful to the hotel); specifically, all numbers that are not prime powers, such as 15 or 847, will no longer be occupied. (So, strictly speaking, this shows that the number of arrivals is less than or equal to the number of vacancies created. It is easier to show, by an independent means, that the number of arrivals is also greater than or equal to the number of vacancies, and thus that they are equal, than to modify the algorithm to an exact fit.) (The algorithm works equally well if one interchanges   and  , but whichever choice is made, it must be applied uniformly throughout.)
Prime factorization method[edit]
Each person of a certain seat   and coach   can be put into room   (presuming c=0 for the people already in the hotel, 1 for the first coach, etc.). Because every number has a unique prime factorization, it is easy to see all people will have a room, while no two people will end up in the same room. For example, the person in room 2592 ( ) was sitting in on the 4th coach, on the 5th seat. Like the prime powers method, this solution leaves certain rooms empty.
This method can also easily be expanded for infinite nights, infinite entrances, etc. (   )
Interleaving method[edit]
For each passenger, compare the lengths of   and   as written in any positional numeral system, such as decimal. (Treat each hotel resident as being in coach #0.) If either number is shorter, add leading zeroes to it until both values have the same number of digits. Interleave the digits to produce a room number: its digits will be [first digit of coach number]-[first digit of seat number]-[second digit of coach number]-[second digit of seat number]-etc. The hotel (coach #0) guest in room number 1729 moves to room 01070209 (i.e., room 1,070,209). The passenger on seat 1234 of coach 789 goes to room 01728394 (i.e., room 1,728,394).
Unlike the prime powers solution, this one fills the hotel completely, and we can reconstruct a guest's original coach and seat by reversing the interleaving process. First add a leading zero if the room has an odd number of digits. Then de-interleave the number into two numbers: the coach number consists of the odd-numbered digits and the seat number is the even-numbered ones. Of course, the original encoding is arbitrary, and the roles of the two numbers can be reversed (seat-odd and coach-even), so long as it is applied consistently.
Triangular number method[edit]
Those already in the hotel will be moved to room  , or the  th triangular number. Those in a coach will be in room  , or the   triangular number plus  . In this way all the rooms will be filled by one, and only one, guest.
This pairing function can be demonstrated visually by structuring the hotel as a one-room-deep, infinitely tall pyramid. The pyramid's topmost row is a single room: room 1; its second row is rooms 2 and 3; and so on. The column formed by the set of rightmost rooms will correspond to the triangular numbers. Once they are filled (by the hotel's redistributed occupants), the remaining empty rooms form the shape of a pyramid exactly identical to the original shape. Thus, the process can be repeated for each infinite set. Doing this one at a time for each coach would require an infinite number of steps, but by using the prior formulas, a guest can determine what his room "will be" once his coach has been reached in the process, and can simply go there immediately.
Arbitrary enumeration method[edit]
Let  .   is countable since   is countable, hence we may enumerate its elements  . Now if  , assign the  th guest of the  th coach to the  th room (consider the guests already in the hotel as guests of the  th coach). Thus we have a function assigning each person to a room; furthermore, this assignment does not skip over any rooms.
Further layers of infinity[edit]
Suppose the hotel is next to an ocean, and an infinite number of car ferries arrive, each bearing an infinite number of coaches, each with an infinite number of passengers. This is a situation involving three "levels" of infinity, and it can be solved by extensions of any of the previous solutions.
The prime factorization method can be applied by adding a new prime number for every additional layer of infinity (  , with   the ferry).
The prime power solution can be applied with further exponentiation of prime numbers, resulting in very large room numbers even given small inputs. For example, the passenger in the second seat of the third bus on the second ferry (address 2-3-2) would raise the 2nd odd prime (5) to 49, which is the result of the 3rd odd prime (7) being raised to the power of his seat number (2). This room number would have over thirty decimal digits.
The interleaving method can be used with three interleaved "strands" instead of two. The passenger with the address 2-3-2 would go to room 232, while the one with the address 4935-198-82217 would go to room #008,402,912,391,587 (the leading zeroes can be removed).
Anticipating the possibility of any number of layers of infinite guests, the hotel may wish to assign rooms such that no guest will need to move, no matter how many guests arrive afterward. One solution is to convert each arrival's address into a binary number in which ones are used as separators at the start of each layer, while a number within a given layer (such as a guest's coach number) is represented with that many zeroes. Thus, a guest with the prior address 2-5-1-3-1 (five infinite layers) would go to room 10010000010100010 (decimal 295458).
As an added step in this process, one zero can be removed from each section of the number; in this example, the guest's new room is 101000011001 (decimal 2585). This ensures that every room could be filled by a hypothetical guest. If no infinite sets of guests arrive, then only rooms that are a power of two will be occupied.
Infinite layers of nesting[edit]
Although a room can be found for any finite number of nest


 

If infinite groups of infinite guests come[change | change source]
The guest at room 11 would move to room 101. The second person of group 5 (Address 5-2) would go to room 25.
This is not really a paradox, it is only counterintuitive. In a normal hotel, with a finite number of rooms, the number of odd-numbered rooms, is smaller than the total number of rooms. In Hilbert's Hotel this does not seem to be the case.
 
CONCLUSION :
Basically this type of problems/propositions seems to be contradictory to what we expect.  The properties of infinite collections of things are quite different from those of finite collections of things. The paradox of Hilbert's Grand Hotel can be understood by using Cantor's theory of “Transfinite Numbers “. Transfinite numbers means numbers that are "infinite" in the sense that they are larger than all finite numbers, yet not necessarily absolutely infinite. 
Thus, in an ordinary (finite) hotel with more than one room, the number of odd-numbered rooms is obviously smaller than the total number of rooms. However, in Hilbert's aptly named Grand Hotel, the quantity of odd-numbered rooms is not smaller than the total "number" of rooms. In mathematical terms, the cardinality of the subset containing the odd-numbered rooms is the same as the cardinality of the set of all rooms. Indeed, infinite sets are characterized as sets that have proper subsets of the same cardinality. For countable sets (sets with the same cardinality as the natural numbers) this cardinality is  
Rephrased, for any countably infinite set, there exists a bijective function which maps the countably infinite set to the set of natural numbers, even if the countably infinite set contains the natural numbers. For example, the set of rational numbers—those numbers which can be written as a quotient of integers—contains the natural numbers as a subset, but is no bigger than the set of natural numbers since the rationals are countable: there is a bijection from the naturals to the rationals.



